[Multinomial Probability Distributions]{.underline}

Goodness of Fit tests are hypothesis tests that determine whether or not
a categorical variable has a particular probability distribution across
its categories.

Goodness-of-Fit tests employ the concept of a *[multinomial probability
distribution]{.underline}*, which is a probability distribution that
gives the probabilities of three or more categorical outcomes. A
multinomial probability distribution for *k* categorical outcomes is
simply a list of probabilities, one per category of the variable, like
this:

$$\text{p}_{\mathbf{1}} = P_{1} = probability\ of\ an\ outcome\ being\ in\ category\ 1$$

$$\text{p}_{\mathbf{2}} = P_{2} = probability\ of\ an\ outcome\ being\ in\ category\ 2$$

$$\ldots$$

$$\text{p}_{\mathbf{k}} = P_{k} = probability\ of\ an\ outcome\ being\ in\ category\ k$$

-   Category probabilities ($P_{1},P_{2},\ldots,\ P_{k}$) must always be
    between 0 and 1; that is, $0 \leq P_{i} \leq 1$. Therefore, if
    probabilities are expressed as percentages in a problem, those
    percentages must be divided by 100 to get probabilities.

-   In a properly formulated multinomial probability distribution, the
    sum of all of the category probabilities is 1.

*Example 1:*

Suppose you were studying a population of cats at an animal shelter. The
variable you are interested in is color. The cats at the shelter come in
three colors: tabby, black, and calico. 25% of the cats are tabby, 60%
of the cats are black, and 15% of the cats are calico. Construct the
multinomial probability distribution of color for this population.

  $$\mathbf{i}$$   Category   Probability
  ---------------- ---------- -------------
  1                Tabby      
  2                Black      
  3                Calico     

A multinomial probability distribution can be used to calculate
*expected frequencies*. *Expected frequencies* are the number of
outcomes per category that we expect to find in a sample drawn from a
population with the given distribution. To calculate the expected
frequencies for a sample of size $n$, use the following equation:

$$e_{i} = n(P_{i})$$

> where

$${e_{i} = the\ expected\ frequency\ for\ the\ i^{\text{th}}\text{category}
}{n = the\ sample\ size
}{P_{i} = the\ probability\ of\ an\ outcome\ being\ in\ category\ i}$$

NOTE: Expected frequencies often come out with decimals. You should NOT
round them to whole numbers. Keep them at four decimals unless they come
out even to fewer decimal places.

*Example 2:*

Consider the multinomial probability distribution from Example 1. What
are the expected frequencies for a random sample of size 50 drawn from
this population? In other words, how many cats in the sample are
expected to be tabby, how many black, and how many calico,
theoretically?

+----------------+-------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| $$\mathbf{i}$$ | Category~i~ | Probability     | Expected        |
|                |             |                 |                 |
|                |             | $$\mathb        | Frequency       |
|                |             | f{(P}_{\mathbf{ |                 |
|                |             | i}}\mathbf{)}$$ | $$              |
|                |             |                 | \mathbf{(}\math |
|                |             |                 | bf{e}_{\mathbf{ |
|                |             |                 | i}}\mathbf{)}$$ |
+================+=============+=================+=================+
| 1              | Tabby       |                 |                 |
+----------------+-------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| 2              | Black       |                 |                 |
+----------------+-------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| 3              | Calico      |                 |                 |
+----------------+-------------+-----------------+-----------------+

*Example 3:*

a\) A given variable has eight categories. What is the multinomial
probability distribution for this variable if the probability is the
same for all eight categories?

b\) What is the multinomial probability distribution if the variable has
five categories and the probability is the same for all five categories?
