**[Multiple Regression]{.underline}**

Multiple regression models the relationship between one dependent
variable, $y$, and [two or more]{.underline} independent variables
(IVs), which we will notate $x_{1},x_{2},\ x_{3},\ldots,\ x_{p}.$ (Note:
here the subscripts on the $x$'s signify different independent
variables, not individual observations of$\text{\ x}$.) So, multiple
regression is linear regression with more than one independent variable.
Everything we have learned in Simple Linear Regression applies to
Multiple Regression as well, because Simple Linear Regression is just
the special case of multiple regression in which there is only one $x$.

The **Regression Model** describes the relationship between the DV and
the IVs [in the population]{.underline}, and it is given by the
following equation:

$$y = \ \beta_{0} + \beta_{1}x_{1} + \ \beta_{2}x_{2} + \ldots + \ \beta_{p}x_{p} + \ \epsilon$$

> where

$${y = the\ dependent\ variable
}{x_{1},x_{2},\ldots,\ x_{p} = the\ independent\ variables
}{\beta_{0} = the\ population\ intercept
}{\beta_{1},\beta_{2},\ldots\ ,\ \beta_{p} = the\ population\ slopes,which\ are\ the\ coefficients\ on\ the\ x\text{'}\text{s\ }
}{\epsilon = random\ error
}{p = the\ number\ of\ independent\ variables}$$

The betas, ($\beta_{0},\beta_{1},\ \beta_{2},\ \ldots,\ \beta_{p}$), are
population parameters. In other words, they are characteristics of the
population as a whole, and so we cannot know their values without
observing the entire population. When using regression, we take a random
sample from the population of interest and we use that sample to
estimate these parameters (the betas). That process results in the
***estimated regression equation (ERE)*:**

$$\widehat{y} = \ b_{0} + \ b_{1}x_{1} + \ b_{2}x_{2} + \ldots + \ b_{p}x_{p}$$

> where

$${\widehat{y} = the\ expected\ or\ predicted\ value\ of\ y\ (the\ mean\ of\ y)
}{x_{1},x_{2},\ldots,\ x_{p} = the\ independent\ variables
}{b_{0} = the\ sample\ intercept;the\ estimate\ of\ \beta_{0}
}{b_{1},\ b_{2},\ldots,b_{p} = the\ sample\ slopes,which\ are\ the\ coefficients\ on\ the\ x^{'}s;\ }$$

$${\text{the\ }b^{'}\text{s\ are\ the\ estimates\ of\ }\beta_{1},\beta_{2},\ldots,\ \beta_{p}
}{p = the\ number\ of\ independent\ variables}$$

Multiple regression is based on the idea that the relationship between
$y$ and each $x$ is linear, so you still must examine the scatterplot of
$y$ against each $x$ to check for non-linear patterns. If you see
non-linear patterns, you cannot use linear regression to model the
relationship without modifying the variables to make the relationship
linear (techniques for this exist, but are beyond the scope of this
class).

The equations to calculate the coefficients in multiple regression
require calculus or matrix algebra, so we will not be calculating these
by hand. Instead, we will use Excel to produce output for multiple
regression and interpret that output. See **Chapter 14: Handout \#3 --
Interpreting Linear Regression Output** which includes interpretations
for Multiple Regression as well as Simple Linear Regression.
