[The]{.underline} $z$ [Distribution]{.underline}

The $z$ *distribution*, also called the *standard normal distribution*,
is a normal distribution with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of
one. It is used to standardize values in order to determine their
probability. Probability in a $z$ distribution is represented as the
area between the curve and the horizontal axis -- often called the area
under the curve. (This is actually true of all probability distributions
-- they all use area under the curve to measure probability).

Let's draw a $z$ distribution and label some of its important features:

$z$ values are in units of standard deviations, so they express how many
standard deviations away from the mean a particular value is. For
example, a value that standardizes to a $z$ of $2.0$ is two standard
deviations above the mean, while a value that standardizes to a $z$ of
$- 1.6$ is $1.6$ standard deviations below the mean.

The $z$ *table* is used to look up probabilities for different values of
$z$. The probability of a value falling at or above a given $z$ is
called the upper tail probability, or *upper tail p-value.* The
probability of a value falling at or below a given $z$ is called the
lower tail probability, or *lower tail p-value*. The probability of a
value falling a given distance away from the mean in either tail is
called the *two-tailed p-value* (don't worry -- there will be more on
this one later). These p-values will be very important in hypothesis
testing, where they will be the evidence in the *p-value approach to
rejecting the null hypothesis.*

*Example 1*. What is the probability that a randomly drawn z value would
be greater than or equal to 1.24? This is what is called the **upper
tail p-value** of $z = 1.24$

*Example 2.* What is the probability that a randomly drawn z value would
be less than or equal to $- 1.84$? This is what is called the **lower
tail p-value** of $z = - 1.84.$

*Example 3.* What is the probability that a randomly drawn z value would
be at least $2.15$ standard deviations away from the mean? This is what
is called a **two-tailed p-value**.

Now it is your turn! Try the three exercises below.

*Exercise 1.* What is the UT p-value of $z = 2.50$?

*Exercise 2.* What is the LT p-value of $z = - 1.00$?

*Exercise 3.* What is the 2T p-value of $z = - 2.82$?

**[Critical Values of Z]{.underline}**

Critical Values (CVs) are values of $z$ with given tail probabilities.
In notation, Critical Values are always subscripted with a probability.
In general, $\mathbf{z}_{\mathbf{\alpha}}$ is the CV of $z$ with
$\alpha$ probability in the upper tail, and
$\mathbf{-}\mathbf{z}_{\mathbf{\alpha}}\ $is the CV of $z$ with $\alpha$
probability in the lower tail.

Some common CVs of $z$ are given in the inset table on the first page of
the z table, reproduced here:

![](media/image1.png){width="2.1302241907261594in"
height="1.6198031496062992in"}

where $\alpha = \ $the tail probability

and $z_{\alpha} = \ $the Critical Value of $\text{z\ }$with $\alpha$
probability in the tail

*Example 4.* Look up the **upper tail CV** of $\text{z\ }$at
$\alpha = 0.05.$ Draw and fully label the $z$ distribution showing the
CV and shading in the tail probability.

*Example 5.* Look up the **lower tail CV** of $z$ at $\alpha = 0.01.$
Draw and fully label the $z$ distribution showing the CV and shading in
the tail probability.

*Example 6.* Look up the **two-tailed Critical Values** of $z$ at
$\alpha = 0.05.\ $Draw and fully label the $z$ distribution. Here are
the steps to look up the 2T CVs:

1.  Split $\alpha$ between the two tails by dividing $\alpha$ by 2

2.  Look up the LT CV of $\text{z\ }$at $\alpha/2$ and the UT CV of
    $\text{z\ }$at $\alpha/2$. These are your 2T CVs.

**[Why do we need Critical Values?]{.underline}**

Critical Values can give us information about the p-value (the
probability) of other values of $z$. This use of CVs will be very
important in hypothesis testing, where they will be the evidence in the
*Critical Value approach to rejecting the null hypothesis.*

What is the UT CV of $z$ at $\alpha = 0.10?$ Draw and fully label the
$z$ distribution. What can this picture tell us about the UT p-value of
$z = 4.1?$
